docs: tw791 document auth-rpc and validation api (#3292)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/07-arbitrum-node-runners/04-run-split-validator-node.mdx

## Running split validators for Arbitrum chains

Split validators separate the validation work to a stateless validation node, which provides several key benefits:

- **Resource management**: Easier to scale and manage compute resources independently
- **Fault isolation**: Prevents database corruption if the validation node crashes (e.g., due to OOM errors)
- **Flexibility**: Allows running multiple validation nodes for horizontal scalability

> This guide explains how to set up a split validator configuration for Arbitrum chains by running a Nitro node (staker) and a validation node separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to set up a split validator configuration for Arbitrum chains by running a Nitro node (bonder) and a validation node separately.
```

Before you read this doc, please ensure you have already walked through [run a validator](/run-arbitrum-node/more-types/02-run-validator-node.mdx) docs to understand the basics of a validator node.

### What is AUTH-RPC and the validation API

Nitro nodes can expose two separate WebSocket RPC interfaces:

- **The public RPC** (configured under `--http.*` and `--ws.*`) serves the standard `eth_`, `net_`, and other namespaces that wallets and dApps use.
- **AUTH-RPC** (configured under `--auth.*`) is a second, JWT-authenticated WebSocket interface intended for trusted intra-component communication. It listens on its own address and port and by default exposes only the `validation` namespace.

> The `validation_*` namespace is how the staker delegates WASM execution to the validation node — it carries `Validate` (run the WASM machine on a prepared input and return the resulting global state) plus `CreateExecutionRun`, `GetStepAt`, and `GetProofAt` (used during challenges to fetch step hashes and one-step proofs). The full method list is in the [`validation_*` API reference](#reference-the-validation-api) below. When the staker and validation node run in the same process, these calls happen in-memory and AUTH-RPC isn't involved. The moment you split them onto separate processes or hosts, AUTH-RPC is the secure transport between them, and a shared JWT secret is what authenticates one to the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `validation_*` namespace is how the bonder delegates WASM execution to the validation node—it carries `Validate` (run the WASM machine on a prepared input and return the resulting global state) plus `CreateExecutionRun`, `GetStepAt`, and `GetProofAt` (used during challenges to fetch step hashes and one-step proofs). The full method list is in the [`validation_*` API reference](#reference-the-validation-api) below. When the bonder and validation node run in the same process, these calls occur in-memory and don’t involve AUTH-RPC. The moment you split them across separate processes or hosts, AUTH-RPC provides the secure transport, and a shared JWT secret authenticates one to the other.
```

### Monitoring and maintenance

> - Monitor your staker and validation node logs regularly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor your bonding and validation node logs regularly:
```

  kubectl logs -f <POD>
  ```

> - Check the status of both the staker and the validation node through the Arbitrum dashboard or API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the status of both the bond and the validation node through the Arbitrum dashboard or API
```

You can also check where this log (`validation node started`) appears:

- If this log appears on the validation node, it means your validation node is running correctly.

> - If this log appears on the staker node, it means your staker node is still validating itself. It indicates that your staker node is not connecting to the validation node correctly; you need to double-check your configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If this log appears on the bond node, it means your bond node is still validating itself. It indicates that your bond node is not connecting to the validation node correctly; you need to double-check your configuration.
```

| `validation_wasmModuleRoots`              | Lists the WASM module roots this node can validate.                  |
| `validation_stylusArchs`                  | Lists the Stylus target architectures the node supports.             |
| `validation_createExecutionRun`           | Starts a long-running execution and returns an `execid` handle.      |
| `validation_getStepAt`                    | Returns the machine hash and global state at a given step.           |
| `validation_getMachineHashesWithStepSize` | Batch step-hash lookup, used during challenge resolution.            |
| `validation_getProofAt`                   | Returns the one-step proof at a given step.                          |
| `validation_prepareRange`                 | Pre-loads execution state for a step range.                          |
| `validation_execKeepAlive`                | Heartbeats an execution run to extend its retention.                 |
| `validation_checkAlive`                   | Probes that an execution run is still loaded on the validation node. |
| `validation_closeExec`                    | Releases an execution run's resources.                               |

> These methods are internal protocol calls between the staker and the validation node. You normally don't invoke them directly — the staker calls them automatically when it needs validation work. This reference is useful mainly when reading logs or debugging connectivity between the two components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods are internal protocol calls between the bond and the validation node. You normally don't invoke them directly—the bonder calls them automatically when it needs validation work. This reference is most useful for reading logs or debugging connectivity between the two components.
```

### Advanced: exposing additional namespaces over AUTH-RPC

> `--auth.api` accepts a list of namespaces, not just `validation`. You can add others — for example `eth` or `net` — if you want to grant a trusted client read access to those APIs without exposing them on the public RPC:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--auth.api` accepts a list of namespaces, not just `validation`. You can add others—for example, `eth` or `net` — if you want to grant a trusted client read access to those APIs without exposing them on the public RPC:
```

```
--auth.api validation,eth,net
```

Anything listed here is served on the AUTH-RPC endpoint and gated by the JWT, so the caller must hold the same JWT secret to access it. The endpoint still listens only on `--auth.addr` (default `127.0.0.1`), so keep it on loopback or a private network — JWT authentication alone is not a substitute for network isolation.

> This is rarely needed for stakers; the main use case is internal services (a custom monitor, an indexer behind your own bastion) that need authenticated read access to the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is rarely needed for bonders; the main use case is internal services (a custom monitor, an indexer behind your own bastion) that need authenticated read access to the node.
```
